So in the previous lecture,
we installed Flutter and Android Studio
so that we can build Android apps with Flutter.
Now in this lecture, we'll create a Flutter project
and see how we can then edit the code
and how we can run this Flutter app
that will be in that project, on our emulator.
And for this, we go back to this command prompt.
In there, we have this Flutter command,
which we can now use, and we can also use it
to create new projects.
Now for this, you first of all,
should navigate inside of this command prompt
into the folder where you wanna create your project.
And you can use the CD command for that,
which stands for change directory.
And here you could, for example,
CD into a folder named development,
if you have such a folder.
I did create that folder before, in my user folder.
And then in that development folder,
you can CD into sub folders.
Now I don't have any sub folders yet,
so what I'll quickly do is in Explorer,
I'll go into that folder, create a new folder there,
which I'll name projects.
Name is up to you.
And then here, back in the command prompt,
I can navigate into this projects folder by typing CD proj
and then I hit tab for auto completion.
And now I'm in that path where I wanna create
my new Flutter folder, and you should use
some global path like this.
Now, once you have that folder,
you can use the flutter command again,
but now we'll run flutter create to create a new project.
And then when you use that command,
which is exposed by Flutter,
you need to give your project a name.
And I'll name it first_app here.
You should use a name that is something like this
that does not contain any wide space, no dashes, no dots,
instead under scores if you have multiple words
which you wanna separate.
And then you can hit enter, and this will now create
a brand new Flutter project in there,
hence in the Explorer and the projects folder,
I now have this first_app folder,
and now we want to open that with some tool that allows us
to view and edit the code.
We could use Android Studio for that,
but since it's a bit heavy and a bit slow in my opinion,
I will use a different tool which has great Flutter support,
and that's Visual Studio Code.
You can search for VS Code
to find code.visualstudio.com,
and VS Code is a free IDE,
a free code editor provided by Microsoft,
which you can download for all operating systems,
which allows you to edit code, not just Flutter code,
but a lot of other programming languages and frameworks
as well, but it does have great Flutter support as well.
So here I'll just download it, and then once
that download finished I'll execute this installer,
which it gives me,
accept the agreement, use the default location,
keep all the other defaults,
and make sure it's added to your path.
This here is in German, but it basically says
that it's added to the path variable.
So I'll keep that and then install it.
And now this will install this Visual Studio Code tool
on our system, which we can use for editing code.
So let's wait for this to finish,
and then we can also start it right away.
And if you start it, you see something like this,
a little starting screen where you can also choose a theme,
and I'll go with the dark theme.
You can also edit this if you go to file, preferences,
and then color theme, here you can also switch the theme,
and I'll use dark plus.
Close this, and then before we open a project,
we'll also install a couple of extensions
because a great feature of Visual Studio Code is that
it has built in extensions support,
and extensions are basically just plug-ins,
which you can install into Visual Studio Code.
So for that, we can go to view, extensions
or use this shortcut here
or click on extensions here on the left.
And then there, there are a couple of extensions
you should install.
Most importantly, you want to search for Flutter here
and install this Flutter extension.
This helps you with writing Flutter code and provides
great support whilst you are writing Flutter code.
So inside of this editor,
you'll then get great support for Flutter.
This also installed a Dart extension automatically,
which will help with Dart code in general,
and Flutter user start, as you learned.
And last but not least, I'll search for Material Icon,
which is totally optional, but which changes
the look of the file icons, and I like that look.
I'm using it throughout this course, and if you want it too,
you can install this Material Icon Theme here
to get that icon look, and then in this dropdown
which opens, I'll select Material Icon Theme
to set my icon look to it.
Click activate here as well.
Okay, so now I got all these things installed.
Now we can open our newly created Flutter project
with Visual Studio Code, and for that here under file,
I'll choose open folder and then go into
the development folder, projects,
and select this first_app folder,
the entire folder and choose that folder.
And then here, I'm prompted whether I want to trust
this folder, and I'll choose yes here.
I'll also accept the recommended VS Code settings
for Dart and Flutter and click on yes here as well.
Now here, we got this Flutter project
opened up in Visual Studio Code.
Now the starting project you get and the exact files
and folders you have in there could vary over time,
and therefore, to ensure that we're all on the same page,
attached you'll find my popspec.yaml file,
so this file here, and my main.dart file in the lib folder,
and you should replace your content in the lib folder
with my main.dart file so if you have more folders
and files in the lib folder, delete them all and use
my attached main.dart file and drag it into
this lib folder and replace
your pubspec.yaml file with mine.
With that, we simply ensure that you have
exactly the same starting configuration and project as I do
and you get the same output as I do.
And with that, we got this set up and we can now run
this project here, and of course also edit it.
Now I'll walk through the different folders and files
and what we have here in the next course section,
so I'll ignore that for now, and instead, I wanna show you
how you can run such a Flutter project
as an Android app here on this Android emulator
which we have up and running.
And this can be done by going to terminal here
and clicking on new terminal in the VS Code menu here.
And this is your system command prompt,
just integrated into VS Code.
The great thing about that is that we can run commands in it
without leaving our project here
and without leaving our code, so we can have
multiple things on the same screen.
And in here, what you can now do to run your application
on this emulator is you can run flutter run,
just make sure that this emulator is up and running.
And then flutter run is a command that will take
your Flutter code, convert it to machine code for Android
in this case, since we have an Android emulator
up and running, and run that Android app on that emulator.
And later in the course, you will also learn how to
run it on real devices and how to
build for different platforms.
Very important, you need to run it inside of your project.
That's why I'm using this integrated terminal because this
integrated terminal will automatically be navigated into
this Flutter project so that this command
is executed from inside that project.
And if you now hit enter,
this will do what I just explained.
It will build your Flutter project as an Android app
and then run it on that Android emulator.
Now the first time you execute this,
this can take a bit longer, so definitely give this
some time, but eventually it should be done,
and then start this Flutter app as an Android app,
as a native Android app on this Android simulator.
So let's wait for that to finish,
and by the way, this will be quite slow and take some time
the first time you do this.
Subsequent changes and restarts will be faster,
so no worries about that.
And now here for me it's crashing, actually.
It's crashing with this error message
that Kotlin could not find the required JDK tools.
If you're not getting this, perfect.
If you are getting it, what you have to do
is Google for, JDK 8, and you should find this page
on oracle.com and then there, pick the download version
for your system.
In my case, Windows.
Now, here we can then download this,
and unfortunately we have to create an account here.
It's free, but we have to do that.
And once you did create that account and then sign in
on this page, the download will start, of this JDK tool,
which we now need to fix this error which we got during
building this Android app with Flutter here.
So let's wait for this download to finish,
and then we can simply walk through this installer,
keep all the defaults here,
and install this Java development kit,
which Android needs under the hood.
And you might not need that because in some installations,
this is set up correctly right from the start.
For me here it wasn't.
I'll also confirm the defaults here
and install Java itself and make sure that
all these tools are installed here.
And once this was installed successfully,
you can go back and you can run flutter run again,
and now this time, it should succeed here
and it should build this application.
And it now also sends this application queue,
this Android emulator, which is up and running here.
And here, you can now play around with this starting app,
which you get if you use my attached files,
the main.dart file and the pubspec.yaml file
as instructed earlier.
And this is now our Flutter project, our Flatter app,
running as a native Android app on this Android simulator.
And now that this is up and running
with that flutter run process, which is a process
that is still running, we can actually now go into
one of our code files here and then search that line
where counter plus plus is executed, line 58,
and change that a little bit.
Now, by the way, I will explain all that code
and how Dart and Flutter work throughout this entire course.
For the moment, we'll just make a quick change here
and change line 58 to say
underscore counter equals underscore counter plus two.
If you then save this file by pressing control, S
so that you don't have this bullet next to
the file name anymore, then you don't have to run
flutter run again to see this change in the running app,
but instead with this ongoing process that was started
by executing flutter run, we can now press R
to perform a so-called hot reload, which basically means
that our updated code is injected into this running app,
which is a quick way of seeing changes
without restarting everything.
So therefore now, if I press R,
this hot reload is performed,
and now if I click the plus here,
this counter changes by two instead of one as before
because of this code change,
which is reflected by this hot reload.
Alternatively, you can also perform a so-called hot restart
by pressing shift, R, which will then also still be quicker
than running flutter run again, but which will restart
that app that's running on the emulator,
which is why now the counter is reset to zero.
And that's how we could run our application here.
Now, I am saying could because whilst this works,
it can be a bit annoying that we have to press R
or shift, R all the time.
Therefore, I'll quit this running flatter run process
by pressing control, C here in this terminal
and confirming it with Y, and I'll close this terminal
because since we installed that Flutter extension earlier,
we also have a different way of running our projects,
our Flutter projects as apps on emulators,
and that will be the way I use throughout this course.
We can go to run and then choose run without debugging.
Later in the course, we will also dive into debugging,
but for now, let's run it without debugging.
And this now also runs flutter run under the hood,
but we don't see it here.
We don't actively have to run this.
We still get a terminal window here, but that's now
actually just a little output window,
which shows info messages and possible warnings to us,
and then we get prompted whether we want to open
the Dart dev tools.
I'll not do that here.
We will see them later, so I'll choose not now for now,
and again, we'll have our app here on this emulator,
but now we have this control panel up here,
where we also could perform a hot reload
or a hot restart by clicking on these buttons
or using the shortcuts which you see here.
And we can always stop this running process
by pressing this stop button,
but the great thing is that if you start your app like this,
you don't even have to use the hot reload button.
If I change my code, for example, to say plus three,
and I then save this, it will automatically perform
this hot reload, so it detects file changes.
So whenever we save a changed file,
and will automatically update the running app here.
And that's of course even more convenient
than manually triggering those updates
with R or shift, R,
and therefore, that's how I will run my apps.
And if you are done for today,
you can always stop this process,
and then the app is shut down on the emulator,
and if you want to work on it again,
you just start this again.
And that's what we'll do throughout the course,
and of course, in the course, I will then also explain
all that code and how Flutter and Dart work.
Now, feel free to also tweak
the appearance of Visual Studio Code
here with the appearance menu.
You can show and hide the sidebars and various other areas
so that you like your editor.
So make sure you tweak it like that,
and then therefore, we are now done and we can continue.
Now, I will say that throughout the rest of the course,
I am working on Mac, but the code you write
is exactly the same, so it won't make a difference for you,
and I also will be using the Android emulator
throughout the course so that's exactly the same
for you also if you use Windows.
So just because I'm using Mac in the next lectures,
and in this entire course, does not mean that you need
to change anything or that you can't follow along.
You can follow along just fine
because the code will be the same.